In the last video, we saw how a binary
chop can be used, to reduce the number of
guesses needed. In this video, we'll write
the code to let the computer guess a number.
The code will implement the algorithm
that we discussed in the slides, in the
last video. So an algorithm is a set of
steps that are followed, to perform a
task or calculate a result. So I'm going
to start with a couple of variables for
our low and high values. We need a new
file for this, and we're going to call
this new Python file hilo.
We're gonna take the opportunity to close some of
these other tabs. Alright, so the variables I'm
starting with: low equals one and high
equals 1000. So next we need some simple
instructions and get the program to wait
until we're ready. So on line 3, print
parentheses double quotes Please think
of a number between,
and we need our left and right curly braces and
another set of left and right curly braces,
because obviously we're going to change that to
the actual numbers, dot format outside of
the double quotes, low comma high in
parentheses and the closing parenthesis.
Then we need to add a line to get
started, so import parentheses double quotes,
press ENTER to start. So on line 5,
we're not interested in anything that
the human types. We're just calling the
input function so that the computer
waits until the user presses the enter
key to start the game.
It will be useful to count the number of
guesses. We know that the computer should
be able to get the correct answer with
ten guesses at most, and that's because
we're having the range of numbers each
time, and two to the power of 10 is 1,024.
So that's slightly more than 1,000. In
fact, the computer can guess any number
from 1 to 1,023, within 10 guesses.
But 1,023 is a strange number to
show to the user. That's why we're
sticking with 1,000. Alright so we need
a variable now to store the
number of guesses,
so on line 7, I'll type guesses equals 1.
Alright so we'll use a while loop to
let the computer keep guessing until it
gets the answer. After each guess the
human will tell the computer whether to
guess higher or lower, or if it got the
answer right. We'll keep looping until
the answer is correct and break out of
the loop when it is. So I'm going to do a
while True colon, then on line 9,
guess equals low plus, and in parentheses, high take low,
integer division so two slashes there, 2.
So we're dividing by 2 there and
making sure that we're using integer
division. Now I mentioned while True in
an earlier video. True is always true,
which means this loop will go round forever.
Sometimes it's easier to do that then
break out of the loop at some point,
rather than trying to include a
condition in the while loop. So what we
want, is for the loop to stop when the
computer gets the right answer, but
because the computer doesn't know the
answer, we can't include a test here. So
what I mean is, on line 8 here, we can't
do something like wild guess is not
equal to answer, because we don't actually
know the value of answer. So I'm going to
do that change and go back to what we
had, while True, so that the program will
keep looping. The line 9 is the formula
that we saw in the slides in the
previous video. It calculates the
midpoint between the low and high values
to produce the next guess. So what we'll
do is we'll print the guess, then ask the
user to type H if the computer should guess
higher, L if the computer should guess
slower or C if the guess was correct. And
we can include the text that we want to
print in the input prompt. So I'm going to come down here, line 10,
high underscore low is equal to
input parentheses double quotes My guess
is and left and right curly braces.
Full stop. Should I guess
higher or lower? - should I type better as well.
Should I guess higher or lower? Enter h
or l, or c if my guess was correct, and then
double quotes, and we can't really see
now and I'm going to actually talk about
having lines that are too long, in a minute.
We're gonna keep typing for now and
put dot format left parenthesis guess
two right parentheses, then outside of that I'm
going to do dot casefold. So again, as I
pointed out there, that line is a bit
long. So you can easily see here the
problem that long lines can cause,
because it's hard for me to show it all
on the video. In fact, I can't show the
entire line on the video right now.
I don't want to digress here, but I will be
talking about line length and other
things about formatting a code in a
later video. Remember this example and
how inconvenient it is for you to type
the code from my screen, when we come
back to code style, noting that you can't
see it all at once. For now, though, what I'm
going to do is split this line. So I'm
going to position the cursor before
the E of enter. I'm going to type a double
quote, then I'm going to press Enter.
That gives an error, as you can see, but
that's okay, just enter another double
quote here and that then delimits the
split-up string correctly. If I go back
now, we can see the whole thing on the
screen. The double quote should line up
with the one on the line above but don't
worry too much about that just yet. We'll
leave it as it is for now. What we will
do is position the cursor again before the
dot of format, up here before the dot,
press ENTER again. That's now split the
line into three. Now rather than lining
up manually, what you could do is go to
the code menu and choose Reformat code.
Most modern IDEs have a similar feature,
and now the code is correctly formatted,
as you can see. Alright so I think you'd
agree now, that's easier to read. You can
now see all the code on my screen and I
don't have to scroll
sideways as much to show it to you.
Alright so moving on with this program,
we've got four possibilities to deal
with. The user could enter h for a
high guess, so let's start with that.
So I'll start that on line 14.
If high underscore low is equal to
h in lowercase : Remember we're using case
fold on line 12,
so we're guaranteed it's going to be in
lowercase. And the comment here, we want
to Guess higher. The low end of the range
becomes 1 greater than the guess.
Now I'm not going to add the code for
guessing higher. Let's get all the
conditions in place first. That'll let
you see what the conditions are, but it
will cause a problem. Because the error
message is very confusing, I want to get
the error and explain it. Right, so moving
on now, the next condition to test is if
the user enters l for lower. So we're
going to go ahead and do that on line 17:
elif high_low is equal to l :
again in lower case, and a comment
for that will be Guess lower. The high end of
the range becomes 1 less than the guess.
So we're getting errors here but we'll
ignore them for the moment.
Next the input would be c if the guess
is correct, so let's move down on to that,
line 20, elif high_low is
equal to c in double quotes, lower case c :
So what I'll do here is print out the answer
here, no need to add a comment, so print
parentheses double quotes I got it
in, left and right curly braces
guesses exclamation mark double quote dot
format guesses. Alright we'll scroll up a
little bit so we can see the other code.
Alright so that's the three conditions
that we expect, but humans often don't do
what we expect, and we should also deal
with anything else that they might type.
We're gonna use an else block to do that.
I'm gonna come down here, on line 23, else colon
print parentheses Please enter h, l or c.
So if they do anything else, we just remind
them what the three options are. Alright,
so I'm going to stop the video here and
in the next one, we'll look at why we've
got those errors.
See you in the next video.